# :cake: Verticle Slice Architecture: Design Pattern

## Introduction

As software applications grow in complexity, it becomes increasingly important to organize code in a way that promotes efficiency, maintainability, and scalability. One approach to achieving these goals is through the use of vertical slice architecture. This pattern is particularly relevant for service API applications or server-side web applications.

## Vertical versus layered onion

Example of layered architecture:
```
public class BugController : ControllerBase
{
    [HttpGet("/bug/{id:guid}")]
    public IResult GetBug([FromRoute]Guid id) => getBugHandler.Handle(id);
}

public class GetBugHandler
{   
   public Bug Handle(Guid id) => bugDb.GetBug(id);
}

public class DataLayer
{
   public Bug GetBug(Guid id) => //data retrieval logic 
}
```
The example mentioned involves retrieving a bug, which requires logic from three classes: one for the UI, one for the domain, and one for the data layer. It's possible that these classes could be situated in different assemblies. Additionally, these classes might contain methods and logic for other bug-related features.

If changes need to be made to the bug retrieval feature, it would require modifying all three (or potentially more) classes.

Example of vertical slice architecture:
```
public static class GetById
{
    public record GetBug(
        Guid Id,
        string Title,
        string Description,
        DateTime ReportTime);

    public static void SetupGetByIdBug(this WebApplication webApplication)
    {
        webApplication.MapGet("/bug/{id:guid}", Handler);
    }

    private static readonly Func<Guid, BugDb, CancellationToken, Task<IResult>> Handler = async (id, bugsDb, token) =>
    {
        return await bugsDb.Bugs.SingleOrDefaultAsync(b => b.Id == id, token) //...
    };
}
```
In this example, we can observe that all the logic for the bug retrieval feature is contained within a single class. Some class definitions may also be nested, but modifying this feature would only involve updating this file.

In large applications, developers typically write feature slices rather than layers. Writing a feature slice in an application is easier and requires less effort. When using a layered architecture to write a feature, developers must navigate through various locations to get a complete view of the feature. However, with a vertical slice architecture, developers can see the full functionality in a single module.

In a vertical slice architecture, each feature can describe the same object with only the properties that are relevant to that specific feature. Only data that is relevant to the feature is retrieved from the database. This is not the case in layered architecture, where usually there is only one method to retrieve an entire object with properties that may not be needed for the feature at hand.

In a layered architecture, the Bug class is often the same for all CRUD operations.
```
public class Bug 
{
   public Guid Id { get; set; }
   public string Title { get; set; }
   public string Description { get; set; }
   public string Description { get; set; }
   public List<Attachment> { get; set; }
}
```

In a vertical slice architecture, the class for editing would only include the Title and Description fields because these are the only fields that are important for the update feature.
```
public class Bug 
{
   public string Title { get; set; }
   public string Description { get; set; }
}
```

## Give more meaning to the domain

When writing a vertical slice architecture, it becomes evident that a significant portion of the code revolves around saving or retrieving objects. In this type of architecture, we can consider domain code as the code that lies between the retrieval and saving of objects. Such code can be placed in a common location for multiple features.

```
private static readonly Task<Bug> EditBug(Bug bug)
{
    var dbBug = db.Find(bug.id)

    //domain logic

    db.Update(dbBug);
    db.SaveChanges()

    return dbBug;
}
```

## Refactoring steps

Refactoring a layered-style application into a vertical slice architecture can be challenging at first. A good starting point is to write all the code for a feature in a single function or class, including the UI and data layer if possible. To split the logic, you can use patterns such as CQRS. Domain or utility logic can be written in a common location to prevent code duplication.

```
private static readonly Task<Bug> EditBug(Bug bug)
{
    var dbBug = db.Find(bug.id)

    var validUpdate = Bug.ValidateFields(bug);

    if(validUpdate)
    {
        dbBug.ApplyFields(bug);
        db.Update(dbBug);
        db.SaveChanges()
    }
    return dbBug;
}
```

## Testing

Testing should focus on the entire feature, including the UI and any data layer involved. Common domain or utility code can be tested in separate unit tests to prevent overlap in testing and increase code coverage.

## Disadvantages

Greater risk of code duplication: Since each feature slice includes all necessary components for a complete feature, there is a greater risk of code duplication across different slices. This can make it more difficult to maintain code quality and can increase the risk of bugs or other issues.

Higher development cost: Implementing vertical slice architecture requires significant upfront investment in the design and implementation of each slice. This can result in higher development costs than a traditional layered architecture approach.


## Conclusion

In conclusion, vertical slice architecture is a powerful pattern to try out. While there are advantages and disadvantages, the current trend in the tech industry is towards more serverless and functional applications with a vertical slice architecture. As a result, this architecture style is becoming increasingly attractive in the industry.


## Documentation

:link:[Vertical Slice Architecture - Jimmy Bogard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5kOzZz2vj2o)

:link:[Restructuring to a Vertical Slice Architecture - Derek Comartin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cVVMbuKmNes)

:link:[Organize Code by Feature | Vertical Slices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PRns0rqPonA)

:link:[Getting Started With MediatR and Vertical Slices in .NET - Nick Chapsas](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ve__md8LeDY)