# :world_map: Object relational mappers for storage

## Usage

An ORM, or Object-Relational Mapping, is a programming technique that allows developers to interact with a relational database using an object-oriented programming language.

**Entity Framework** (EF) is an example of an ORM for .NET applications. It is a framework that allows developers to work with data in a relational database using .NET objects. 

Instead of writing raw `SQL` queries to interact with the database, developers can use EF to perform CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations using familiar programming constructs like classes and `LINQ` (Language-Integrated Query).

## Example

### Storing an entity:
```
var book = new Book()
{
   Title = "Journey to the center of the Earth"
};

bookKeepingContext.Books.Add(book);

await bookKeepingContext.SaveChangesAsync(token);
```

### Querying an entity:
```
return await bookKeepingContext.Books
                .AsNoTracking()
                .SingleOrDefaultAsync(b => b.Identity == id, token);
```


## TLDR;

Install the main package:
```
Install-Package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore
```
This contains the library that provides the majority of functionalities.

Install a adapter package:
```
Install-Package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.SqlServer
```
This is an adapter specifically for **MS SQL Server**. 

There are other adapters for different database engines such as **PostgreSQL** and **MySQL**.

Create a `DbContext` class:
```
public class YourDbContext : DbContext
{
    public YourDbContext(DbContextOptions<YourDbContext> options) : base(options)
    {
    }

    //Table in the database
    public DbSet<YourEntity> YourEntities { get; set; }
}
```

This class represents the database context and includes properties that correspond to tables in the database.

Register the `DbContext` to the IoC container and provide a connection string:
```
services.AddDbContext<YourDbContext>(options =>
            options.UseSqlServer(Configuration.GetConnectionString("DefaultConnection")));
```

## Deep Dive

The following section will provide more details about the functionality of the ORM.

### Configurations

.Net objects can be mapped to `SQL` Tables using the `IEntityTypeConfiguration` interface.

**Entity Framework** provides two ways to configure entities: .Net Attributes and Fluent API.

The following is an example of Fluent API:
```
public class YourEntityConfiguration : IEntityTypeConfiguration<YourEntity>
{
    public void Configure(EntityTypeBuilder<YourEntity> builder)
    {
        builder.HasKey(e => e.Id);
        builder.Property(e => e.Name).IsRequired().HasMaxLength(50);
        // Other configuration here...
    }
}
```
Such configurations can define details such as primary keys, foreign keys, unique constraints, column types, and everything else that you would define in a `SQL` script.

Configurations can be registered in the DbContext:
```
public class YourDbContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<YourEntity> YourEntities { get; set; }

    protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    {
        modelBuilder.ApplyConfiguration(new YourEntityConfiguration());
    }
}
```

An assembly scan can also pe berformed to register the configurations:
```
modelBuilder.ApplyConfigurationsFromAssembly(Assembly.GetExecutingAssembly());
```

### Querying

A `DbContext` represents a session with the database.

Here is an example of querying data from the database:
```
using (var context = new YourDbContext())
{
    var entity = context.YourEntities.FirstOrDefault(e => e.Id == 1);
}
```
Instead of the `FirstOrDefault()` call, more complex queries such as `Join()`, `Where()`, `GroupBy()`, and `OrderBy()` can be performed in the same way that `LINQ` would work on a collection of .Net objects.

These functions are implemented by the specific adapter library and might not all function as they would on a normal collection of .Net objects.

The adapter library will try to translate `LINQ` queries as best as it can to `SQL` Query statements. Over time, the **Entity Framework** adapter will support more functionalities of a `LINQ` statement, but for now, the adapter supports all the important functionalities and is mostly missing some edge cases.


### CRUD Operations

In **Entity Framework**, the `DbContext` uses an object tracker to keep track of all entities that it has loaded or that have been added, deleted, or modified. This tracking mechanism is essential for the `DbContext` to know what operations it needs to perform when `SaveChanges()` is called.

```
using (var context = new YourDbContext())
{
    // Create
    var newEntity = new YourEntity { Name = "New Entity" };
    context.YourEntities.Add(newEntity);
    context.SaveChanges();

    // Update
    newEntity.Name = "Updated Entity";
    context.SaveChanges();

    // Delete
    context.YourEntities.Remove(newEntity);
    context.SaveChanges();
}
```

The `Add()` method adds a new entity to the YourEntities `DbSet`. The `SaveChanges()` method then saves this new entity to the database.

The Remove method marks an entity for deletion. The `SaveChanges()` method then deletes this entity from the database.

For the update operation, we just need to modify the properties of an entity that's being tracked by the `DbContext`, and then call `SaveChanges()`.

### Relationships

In order for **Entity Framework** to understand relationships between entities, as they are as relationships between tables in the database, these properties must be configured either using `Fluent API` or by conventions.

With `Fluent API`:
```
 modelBuilder.Entity<Book>()
            .HasOne(b => b.Author)
            .WithMany(a => a.Books)
            .HasForeignKey(b => b.AuthorId);
```

To configure relationships by convention, it means that the entities must have specific navigational properties named in a certain way.

For example: To model a *one-to-many* relationship between an author and books, the author entity must have a navigational property which is a collection of books, and the book entity must have a property defining the primary key of the author. Additionally, the book can also have a single navigational property of an author as well. Following such convention, **Entity Framework** will scan the .Net Objects and understand the relationship between these entities.

```
public class Author
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public ICollection<Book> Books { get; set; }
}

public class Book
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Title { get; set; }
    public int AuthorId { get; set; }
    public Author Author { get; set; }
}
```
With **Entity Framework**, relationships can be configured as *one-to-one*, *one-to-many*, or *many-to-many*.

In all of these relationships, one of the entities is always the primary and the other the dependent.

These relationships are defined as required and therefore in the database as cascade delete. If the navigational properties are nullable, then the relationship becomes optional and there is no longer a cascade delete constraint between the entities. More delete behaviors can be configured using the `FluentAPI`.

### Extra features

For code examples check out the `BookKeeping` project in this git repo.

#### Migrations

**Entity Framework** can also be used to generate the DDL(Data Definition Language) `SQL` scripts that can create the tables. It can also be used to create intermediate transformation scripts, known as migrations, which update the definition of the schema in the table.

#### Optimizing Queries and CRUD operations

**Entity Framework** provides an API to perform specific operations much faster, such as updates and deletes, without performing an initial query.

Queries can also be optimized to not cache the objects to improve speed using the `AsNoTracking()` `LINQ`  query function.

#### Temporal tables

Temporal tables can be used to enhance a table by creating another table that would store previous values of rows.

#### Json Columns

JSON Columns can be used to store JSON documents. **Entity Framework** can map such a JSON document to a complex hierarchy of .Net objects and vice versa.

#### Concurrency Token

In **Entity Framework**, a `Concurrency token` is a property that is used to handle simultaneous updates to the same record in a database.

```
public class YourEntity
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    [ConcurrencyCheck]
    public int Version { get; set; }
}
```

For code examples check out the `BookKeeping` project in this git repo.

## :books: Documentation

[**Entity Framework** Core MS Docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/)

[Learn **Entity Framework**](https://www.learnentityframeworkcore.com/)